
I remember a number of years ago when _The Hunger Games_ books started coming out and the whole world was ablaze with excitement. Copies of the books were stacked at the front of every bookstore, and Hollywood was scrambling to exploit the hype with some movie versions. Since then the world has become fascinated by and enamored with the idea of a dystopian future. And I’ve wondered, _what would a Christian dystopia be like_? Let me describe a possible scenario.

In a Christian dystopia the first thing you might notice is that everything is done for money, and everyone has a thousand seemingly good reasons for maintaining this status quo. There is nothing too sacred to be sold as merchandise. The peddling of God’s Word has become so standard that no one would ever question it. The sale of the gospel in all forms is highly respectable. A limited number of rich Christians hoard their abundance of biblical resources, tools, and teaching, refusing to share with the rest of the Church unless they sign agreements and pay fees and do not share with their neighbors. The words of the prophet Micah ring more true than ever when he says, “Its leaders give judgment for a bribe; its _priests teach for a price_; its prophets practice divination for money; yet they lean on Yahweh and say, “Is not Yahweh in our midst? No disaster shall come upon us” (Mic 3:11). It’s even considered normal to pay for your friendships. If you want someone who seems trustworthy, will listen to you for hours, offer advice, make you feel loved, point you to Christ, and encourage you with the truth of Scripture, you have to pay for it…by the hour.

Christians are constantly threatening each other with lawsuits for using each other’s artwork, writing, or music. Beautiful songs written to exalt Jesus are bought and sold as investments and monetized like any other secular hit. Churches cannot even sing these songs without risking legal action against them unless they pay. Christian blogs, websites, podcasts, YouTube channels, and other media are constantly monetized with ads. God’s translated Word is claimed by men as their property and then restricted from being shared. Even ancient manuscripts of the Bible are greedily monetized and forbidden from being copied and displayed.

Every spiritual thing and every ministry that leads to Jesus is blocked by a paywall. If you’re too poor, you’re denied access. And so most of the world’s marginalized cultures who can’t understand English or who don’t have a credit card are told to make do with less. They are not important enough to share in the bountiful theological feast rich westerners enjoy, simply because they’re poor. They are not important enough to grow from robust commentaries and discipleship resources, because they’re poor.

The Jesus trade is for the wealthy, and it’s not allowed to be criticized because it’s so comfortable and convenient. Anyone who dares challenge it is immediately silenced by a barrage of twisted interpretations of Scripture and excuses born out of pragmatism and expediency. The words of our Master, “Freely you have received; freely give,” (Matt 10:8) are explained away as irrelevant. We claim Jesus as Lord, but treat him as commodity. We’ve cleverly turned our greeds into needs. Christ has become our great high product.

So is this dystopian hellscape really just imaginary? No. It is with deep sadness and regret that I present this as a portrayal of our present reality.


### Our Purpose

I say all of this by way of introduction, to explain what this book is about. Our purpose here is to highlight and exalt the radical generosity of God’s heart, confront the commercialization of Christianity, and promote the biblical teaching that _ministry should be supported but never sold_. We want to explore the history of how we’ve gotten to the point where it’s the respectable default to monetize ministry, and take a deep dive into the Scripture’s teaching on the subject. We believe our evangelical cultural moment has a serious blind spot in this area, and we hope to be a voice of reform. Overall, we seek to take seriously the many things the Bible has to say about the relationship between money and ministry.

Spoiler alert: we’re not going to be telling people they should be poor if they serve God. And we fully believe that the worker is worthy of his wages. Nothing we’re going to share is new, nor is it some kind of fringe bigotry or legalism. We simply want to encourage people to do what the local church has done to support ministry for centuries—rely on the free generosity of God’s people. It’s simple and beautiful. Christian ministry of all kinds has been supported in this way since the time of Jesus. We know it’s possible, but people refuse to follow that biblical model for various reasons, which we’ll be addressing in turn.


### The Beauty of God’s Generous Heart

It’s important for you to know that at the core of all of this we want to take the time to _revel in the beauty of God’s generous heart_! The very fabric of Scripture sings with the glory of a God so radically generous that he _freely_ gave us life, a universe of splendor, rain and sunshine, the laughter of children, the sweetness of his Word, and even _his only Son_. All without charging us a subscription fee. We want God’s example to be our north star. He is our joy and treasure.

We’re not here to tell people they’re going to hell and burden people with the traditions of men. We’ve all failed and learned along the way as we sought to reflect God’s heart and love him. We completely understand that most people have simply never thought about these things.

Also, we’re not here to address the prosperity gospel and the more extreme forms of manipulating believers and Scripture for the sake of getting rich and buying private jets. That has been confronted already by a lot of good people, and we’re grateful for it. Instead, we’re here to ask hard questions of what most of us perceive to be the normal faith-based market. Questions like, “Should Christian podcasts run ads? Should the Word of God be sold for profit and locked down by copyright? Should biblical counselors charge fees for helping people find healing in Christ? Is it God-honoring for a preacher to sell his digital sermon recordings? Does Scripture permit a scholar to profit from a commentary they wrote on a book of the Bible?” These kinds of questions and much more.


### Two Categories & a Definition

There are two main categories of people who engage in the sale of Christian ministry: those who have bad intentions and those who have good intentions. In our experience, many, if not most, have good intentions, so we’ll be focusing mainly on those people and the different ways they’ve been deceived.

Let me take a moment to unpack what “selling Jesus” refers to. First, let me define what I mean by “selling,” and also what I don’t mean. We all know that to _sell something is to exchange it for money_. This means that you deny access to it unless someone pays you. This is _not_ the same as giving it to someone with no strings attached and no expectation of remuneration. This is also _not_ the same as receiving donations to enable you to freely give as much as possible to others: that’s what’s typically called _support_, not selling.

Now, let’s talk about what I mean by “Jesus.” I’m referring to Jesus as the end goal of all Christian ministry. We sing songs like, “It’s all about you, Jesus” for a reason. The spiritual gifts that God bestows on his children are designed to build up the body of _Christ_. Their end goal is to magnify Jesus and extend his reign over all the earth. So if I offer someone biblical counseling, ultimately my goal is to point them to Jesus, to lead them to him as the only healer and fountain of all riches of wisdom and knowledge. If I write a book about the gospel, my ultimate purpose is to lead people to Jesus, to trust him, follow him, abide in him, treasure him. If I teach someone biblical Hebrew, my goal is to get them to Jesus through the deeper study of his Word, because I believe that learning Hebrew helps people see Jesus better, more clearly and accurately, and with more certainty. Again, if I write a worship song, my ultimate intention is to offer a means to exalt Jesus, to enter into his presence with thanksgiving and praise. So Christian ministry of all sorts has that end goal: get people to Jesus, to know him better, to magnify his name, to be closer to him, to walk and talk more like him.

So when we _sell Jesus_, we put a paywall between others and whatever blessing God might have in store for them through our spiritual gifts. In other words, we deny people access to the ministry we are called to bless people with—unless they pay us for it. To sell Jesus is, by extension, to turn him into a product, a commodity, that can be bought, sold, controlled, and kept from those unable to pay.

As disciples of Jesus we believe that one of the most fundamental joys we have is to _imitate him_, even when it comes to how we fund ministry. To copy him is to honor him, especially since he had more to say about money than love and heaven and hell combined. It was a big issue to him, so we believe we should think carefully about it as we follow him. Jesus got deeply emotional about mixing commerce with spiritual things when he drove people out of the temple, so we think this issue is something that should move our hearts to zeal in the same way and cause us to speak up and make radical changes. We pray that this book will start a movement to _decommercialize Christ_, and make it unthinkable for future generations.


### A Haze of Confusion

My desire is to help people understand the difference between _selling_ ministry, which Scripture condemns, and _supporting_ ministry which Scripture commends. Increasingly I’ve found that Christians seem to be caught in a stranglehold or dark cloud of misguided ideas regarding the commercialization of Christianity. In my conversations about this within the scholarly world I’ve found a shocking level of poor thinking in this area, even to the point that some people say that the Bible has nothing to teach us about money and ministry, and that it’s wrong to look for biblical principles to guide us in this area. Others have gone so far as to say that every ministry can be monetized—such as the selling of prayer and baptism—and that it would be biblical and glorifying to God. Maximizing profits from the sale of Jesus is often called “good ministry stewardship” to make it sound better. Things like this have revealed to me the desperate need for more concerted efforts toward promoting reform and abolishing the Jesus-trade in our cultural moment.


### The Jesus Trade

It has become increasingly clear that we are living in a time like the antebellum United States, where the vast majority of ministers of the gospel regularly defended slavery from the pulpit, and even great men like Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield were not without their own blind spots in this area because of its ubiquity and pervasiveness in their cultural moment. If you read _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_ (one of the most beautiful books ever written and one of my all-time favorites), Harriet Beecher Stowe paints detailed portraits of a broad sampling of people who justify the slave trade in different ways, with very complex reasoning in order to make themselves feel better about the status quo. Most of them are well-meaning, many of them are Christians, but they all have one serious blind spot in common—that economic expediency triumphs over biblical principles. Let me say that again. Most people back then were influenced by the belief that _economic expediency was more important than biblical principles_. In other words, we must do everything in our power to make the Bible bow to or cater to the economic forces of our day. Slaveholders simply couldn’t give up the convenience and labor saving comfort that the slavery system provided, which gave them a higher standard of living. And we are in exactly the same position today regarding the Jesus trade. Modern Christians sell ministry because it’s too convenient, too ubiquitous and pervasive and _respectable_, and promises a standard of living many idolize. They eagerly find complex and clever ways to make God in their image—a god of economic expediency. Because in their heart of hearts they believe that money is more powerful than Yahweh for getting things done and spreading the gospel.

One of the things I appreciate about _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_ is that it doesn’t paint cartoon, two-dimensional portraits of people who were deceived by the culture around them into defending the slave trade. Instead, the author brilliantly depicts the genuine complexity that you find in real people who have mixed emotions, complex and varied resources of self-justification, across different social classes, both men and women, and how deep and nuanced people can be who are often full of good intentions—but also carry their own inventory of respectable sins. Which is exactly what we find in people involved in the Jesus trade today who monetize ministry in different ways with the best intentions, but who ultimately compromise the sincerity of ministry and go against biblical principles.

Perhaps we can broadly describe the Jesus trade this way: _Jesus gave his life so you could know God, but the Jesus trade takes your money in exchange for the knowledge of God_.


### The Evangelical Industrial Complex

We now live in a world where we find it impossible to imagine anything else than a vast evangelical industrial complex with shiny products of all kinds ready to meet our consumerist mentalities. But this is a relatively recent development in history, and we want to explore why it happened, and how we can fix it. Modern western countries are the richest, most materialistic countries in all of human history by an order of magnitude, so we think it’s no surprise that the Church has suffered a series of compromises in the area of money and ministry, and cannot see its sin because the Jesus trade is the ocean it’s swimming in.

And we need your help. We need your help to spread the word and pray for us.  Freely giving ministry is a pathway to immeasurable joy. No one has ever regretted it. Our desire is to see Jesus exalted, and no longer belittled as a commodity. The siren song of pragmatism has drowned out all clear thinking about money and ministry. Let us instead fill our ears with the music of Christ.


### A Historical Blind Spot

If you’re like most people, you might struggle to point to something specific in Scripture that would explain _why_ charging for baptism, entry to church, or the Lord’s supper would be wrong—why it would undermine the gospel and dishonor God. But these are the kinds of questions we keep asking biblical scholars and church leaders, and so far we haven’t heard a good answer that shows from Scripture why it’s not ok to charge for these things. Asking payment for such sacred parts of our faith feels instinctively wrong to most of us.

But the idea of charging rent for seats in church definitely didn’t feel wrong to most people a couple centuries back. It used to be common practice in the English-speaking world to rent out pews in churches in order to pay the bills. The belief was that you couldn’t really depend on people to give offerings freely in order to cover church expenses, so the pew rent system became the standard for a long time.

Entire books were written to argue that it was unbiblical to give people seats in church based on payment, but it still hung on for at least _two centuries._ You might have heard of “Free Methodist” churches and wondered what was “free” about them. Well, it was because these were the first Methodist churches to offer their seats to everyone for free! A man named Benjamin Titus Roberts opposed the idea of pew rents as unbiblical, and he was expelled from the Methodist church because of it, and so _Free_ Methodism was born in 1860.

One of the churches that held onto this system the longest was St. Matthew’s Anglican Church in Australia, which didn’t stop charging for seats until 1956. So this was a serious blindspot that the Church had for a couple centuries that we think is absolutely bizarre and embarrassing today. And if you read the arguments for renting out pews, you’ll see that many of them are the same as the arguments people use today to defend the Jesus trade—charging for bibles, Christian teaching, worship, biblical counseling, seminary training, and more. The blind spot has just shifted to a new set of things that are justified in the same way. Instead of being biblically rational, we rationalize.


### Indirect Association

This is a classic example of turning _direct_ association into _indirect_ association in order to justify something we normally would think is wrong. For example, some researchers did an interesting experiment where they put a six-pack of cokes in a communal fridge and waited to see if people would steal them. Within 72 hours all the cokes were gone. But when they put a plate of six one dollar bills in the same communal fridge, after 72 hours no one had touched the money. They did other similar experiments and concluded that people are much more likely to steal _indirectly_ than _directly_. The cokes were each worth a dollar, but people were able to justify taking them more easily because they were an indirect representation of monetary value.

So what does this have to do with the Jesus trade? Evangelicals believe it’s fine to sell Jesus as long as it’s indirectly. In other words, as long as most Jesus sales take place outside the local church, it tricks us into feeling like it’s ok. Most of the commercialization of Christianity happens in _parachurch_ ministries. So it’s a lot easier to swallow when it’s not on Sunday or not within a local gathering of the church. This sleight of hand makes our conscience believe that it’s not inappropriate to charge for entry to a worship event when it takes place in a stadium, or when it’s not directly connected to a local congregation. We don’t recoil as much when someone charges us for biblical counsel in an office that looks nothing like a church building and that feels more like a doctor’s office.

The point is, the more steps removed the Jesus trade is from things we still (arbitrarily) consider sacred, like the local church, the more we are prone to overlook the true reality of what we’re dealing with: sin. That’s one of the reasons why so many Christians are completely comfortable with someone selling _a book about the gospel_, but simultaneously find the idea of charging someone before sharing the gospel with them utterly revolting. We might be horrified to hear Jesus accused of charging an entry fee to hear him preach the sermon on the mount, and turning away those who couldn’t pay. But when it comes to selling a commentary on the sermon on the mount, and locking it down by copyright restrictions so that it’s illegal to share it with those who can’t afford it…well, that’s perfectly fine.

The heart has such ingenious ways of deceiving itself and sugar-coating sin by making it more indirect or giving it nice-sounding labels. You see, this is one of the hallmarks of a dystopia: everyone slavishly, even robotically, follows the status quo, refusing to think critically for themselves. They accept a hellish world around them as normal, and even defend its legitimacy.


### The Primacy of Scripture

But Scripture must always come first and form our foundation; and scriptural principles should be supremely more important than practical concerns. In other words, _let’s figure out what God requires of us, and then work out the practical details later_, rather than squeezing God and the Bible into the mold of our own opinions.

So let’s start with what we see clearly in Scripture as the reason we believe Christian ministry and spiritual things should be supported, but never sold. (Conley Owens has written about this at length in his book _The Dorean Principle_, which is completely free and in the public domain. It is meant to be read as a complement to what has been published in this book.) In Matthew 10 Jesus sends out his disciples on a ministry assignment, and he gives them some instructions: “Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse those who have leprosy, drive out demons. Freely you have received; freely give. Don’t get any gold or silver or copper to take with you in your belts: no bag for the journey or extra shirt or sandals or a staff. For the worker deserves his food.”

It’s important to read Matthew 10 along with the parallel passage in Luke 10 in order to get the full picture of what’s going on here. In Luke 10 Jesus describes the disciples’ mission as the work of “harvesting.” “The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few. Therefore pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest.”

So the question is: how can we obey Jesus’ command to freely give and still pay the bills?  If the worker deserves to eat, how can he eat if Jesus instructs him to give freely? It’s not really hard to answer, but it’s hard for people to accept and apply. The simple answer is that when ministry is supported by the free generosity of God’s people, the servant of God can give freely and still have money to live on. In other words, he doesn’t have to sell Jesus to make ends meet. Instead, Jesus himself will faithfully provide for him through the people of God. In Luke 10:5-7, Jesus makes it clear that there will be people of peace along the way who will give shelter and food to the disciples as they do ministry. In other words, God will provide people to support them as they freely give the spiritual blessings they have freely received.

One of the key issues many miss here is that the worker is worthy to _receive wages from the Lord of the harvest_. That’s totally different from charging _the harvest itself_ for our labor. So the biblical principle is that our living should be provided for _by God_, through his people freely supporting ministry. And they should give out of obligation and gratitude to _God_, not out of a sense of obligation to us. Our job is to trust the Lord of the harvest to provide for us, and do the work our Master has set before us.

Can you see how it would be wrong to say, “Maybe the Lord of the harvest won’t provide my wages, so I’ll charge people for the ministry I do for him”? Or, “The Lord of the harvest isn’t giving me a high enough paycheck, so let me take the money he gives me and also require payment of the people he sent me to bless”?

At this point I want to make it crystal clear that the issue is NOT whether a worker is worthy of his food. We’re all in agreement that you shouldn’t muzzle an ox while he treads the grain. Of course ministers of the gospel should have enough to feed their families. The question is whether people who labor for Christ will rely on _him_ to provide for their needs, or whether they will rely on _their own understanding_ and put a price tag on the grace, truth, and blessing they’re called to impart.

The impulse to make God’s work sustainable and see it funded well is a good impulse, and we should let it drive us to follow Christ’s command to reflect the free nature of the gospel by giving generously so that ministries can flourish and give everything away. It should drive us to trust God to provide in the way _he_ wants to provide. But if we take this good impulse and let it incite us to invent unbiblical ways of funding ministry, we end up undermining the ministries themselves and reflecting the world’s commercial mentality rather than God’s radically generous heart.

Christ’s command is not an isolated verse that addresses the biblical way ministry should be funded. Paul spends entire chapters on this, the prophet Micah speaks out against monetizing spiritual teaching (3:11), and much more. And what do we have to lose if we, who claim to be followers of Jesus, take his command at face value and reflect the free nature of the gospel and the generosity of God that knows no bounds? Proverbs gives us an idea of what might happen: “One gives freely, yet grows all the richer; another withholds what he should give, and only suffers want” (11:24)

Many people who sell Jesus try to make you feel sorry for them by saying that they barely have enough to live on, and then argue that the only way for them to survive is by selling Jesus _more_. But we’re here to offer a better solution: stop selling spiritual and sacred things, obey what Jesus says, embrace what the Church has done for centuries already, and see if God doesn’t bless you beyond what you can ask or imagine. Sadly, many people aren’t willing to step out in faith and see if God will reward obedience. Will you be one of them, or will you take God at his word and experience the incredible, liberating and rewarding joy of giving ministry freely? As a well-known verse says, “Yahweh is my shepherd; _I shall not want_” (Ps 23:1).
