
As we speak with people about abolishing the Jesus trade, a question inevitably arises: “But where will we get the money we need?” The answer is simple: the Lord will provide. And he will do so through the free generosity of his people. To paraphrase Hudson Taylor, “Ministry done in God’s way will never lack God’s supply.” If God is pleased with a ministry, he will sustain it. And if he is displeased, he will not. This sets Christians at a crossroads—will they choose to trust the worldly wisdom of commerce, or will they choose to trust their heavenly Father for their daily bread? Either way, it is an act of faith. Selling ministry never guarantees the income you need. Rather, it is a conscious decision to put your faith in monetization strategies subject to a multitude of unpredictable factors. This is the road of disobedience, and the financial outcome is uncertain. Put another way, the monetary return on disobedience depends on the whims of market forces outside your control.

But what is the return on obedience? Scripture is bursting with promises of God’s provision. He “will supply all your needs according to his glorious riches in Christ Jesus” (Phil 4:19). And Jesus exhorts us, saying, “So do not worry, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’For the Gentiles strive after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them. But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added unto you” (Matt 6:31-33). The psalmist reminds us that “the young lions go lacking and hungry, but those who seek Yahweh lack no good thing” (Ps 34:10). Do we really believe the Bible when it says, “The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want”? Many are quick to say, “God will provide,” yet believe deep down that God could never supply as much as the Jesus trade does. And so they go on defending the sale of the sacred.

Doubting the provision and care of our gracious Master is anything but new. The Israelites grumbled together about food, only to be surprised by bread from heaven (Ex 16). The disciples also wondered where enough bread could be found for thousands of people, only to see the Son of God feed them more than they could eat (Mark 8).

And today we find ourselves called by the Lord of the harvest to do his work, yet we persist in unbelief that he will provide what we need to feed our families. We have recorded in Scripture the testimony of his beautiful faithfulness over the course of millennia, yet we have failed to learn from it. And we return to the mud pies of the world when a banquet is prepared for those who simply believe his promises. In our unbelief we turn our Provider’s blessing and truth into a commodity to be commercialized and controlled for our financial gain.

In the end, this book is calling the modern Church to do something staggeringly uncomplicated and childlike: _trust him_. He is _faithful_. He will never leave you nor forsake you. He will not let you die of thirst in the wilderness. But as long as we continue selling spiritual things and living off the income from peddling God’s Word, we will miss out on water from the rock. If we stay in Egypt we will never taste the manna. The time is now to abolish the Jesus trade, embrace the joy of freely giving, reflect the heart of our generous God, and cast ourselves wholly upon the great Shepherd of the sheep. For the one who calls us is faithful (1 Thess 5:24).
